---
title: Frontend Frameworks in Javascript
description: Lecture notes on JS Frameworks and TypeScript
date: August 19, 2022
categories: [web, notes]
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
hide: false
search_exclude: false
---

These are some unstructured notes on my current understanding of Javascript front end frameworks. This is not a comparison of frameworks nor a benchmark, rather a collection of frameworks and the problem they wanted to solve.


# React
- Problem to solve: updating the state of the application alongside the view, and keeping consistence between both
- View and state separation: state is updated and a render method specifies how to create the view from the state
- Uses JSX syntax
  - Extension of the JS syntax
  - JSX needs to be compiled before reaching a browser
- React enables to create components
- ReactDOM enables to connect components to the browser DOM (compared to React Native for mobile app)
- Virtual DOM: makes it possible to do partial updates of the real DOM by computing diffs on the virtual DOM
- React Hooks : since version 16, hooks are a big part of React, and the prime way to interact with component state
  - `const [state, setState] = useState(initialState);`: creates a state and returns its value plus a function to update the state
  - `useEffect(didUpdate, [dep1, dep2, ...]);`: plays the function passed as an argument after the first rendering, or after each one of the dependency has changed (after its rendering). The `didUpdate` can return a cleaning function, which will be run before running the effect again.
  - `const value = useContext(MyContext);`: returns the closest context provider context value, initialized by the context given in argument.
  - `const [state, dispatch] = useReducer(reducer, initialArg, init);`: Same as useState, but makes it possible to use a reducer function to update the state, via the dispatch function returned. `initialArg` is set as the initial value of the state. the `init` argument is an optional function that will be run if given to lazily initialize the state as `init(initialArg)`.
  - `useCallback`: returns a memoized callback function, which will be updated only if one of its dependencies is changed (passed as second argument).
    ```jsx
    const memoizedCallback = useCallback(
      () => {
        doSomething(a, b);
      },
      [a, b],
    );
    ```
  - `const memoizedValue = useMemo(() => computeExpensiveValue(a, b), [a, b]);`: returns a memoized value, which will be updated only if dependencies change.
  - `const refContainer = useRef(initialValue);`

# Typescript
- Introduces types in Javascript, transpiled into (optimized ?) js
- It is mostly a dev tool:
  - Helps type checking & code consistency
  - Helps auto-completion
  - Compilation readiness
  - Integrations with IDEs are really usefull

# ECMAScript
- ECMA Script est le standard du langage JavaScript. Les différentes versions d'ES définissent une interface avec le langage.
- Les Navigateurs implémentent une version de JavaScript qui leur est propre et implémente donc une edition donnée du standard.
- ES6 est une version majeure car elle a apporté de nombreuses directives structurantes, comme les promesses, de nombreuses structures, la destructuration.
- ES7 a introduit les directives async/await
- Les Navigateurs récents sont très conformes aux éditions d'ES 5, 6 et 7.


# References
- React
  - [Grafikart.fr series on React](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SMgQlTSoXf0)
  - [Hook API Reference](https://fr.reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html)
- Typescript
  - [Typescript with Chris Krycho](https://podcasts.apple.com/fr/podcast/typescript/id1330329512?i=1000444502550)
  - [FR podcast on typescript](https://podcasts.apple.com/fr/podcast/double-slash/id1513703178?i=1000565607318)
- Next.js and Vercel
  - [Vercel and Next.js with Guillermo Rauch](https://podcasts.apple.com/fr/podcast/podrocket-a-web-development-podcast-from-logrocket/id1539945251?i=1000535286428)
  - [React.js and Next.js with Guillermo Rauch on Programming Throwdown](https://podcasts.apple.com/fr/podcast/programming-throwdown/id427166321?i=1000475448955)
- ECMAScript: 
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECMAScript